In machine learning, bias and variance are two fundamental concepts that describe the types of errors a model can have.

Bias is the difference between the expected or average predictions of a model and the actual value.
It’s a systematic error that occurs due to wrong assumptions in the machine learning process.
A high-bias model is too simplistic and underfits the data, meaning it does not capture all the complexities in the data and therefore performs poorly.
For example, a linear regression model may have a high bias if the data has a non-linear relationship.

On the other hand, variance refers to how much the model’s prediction varies for different training sets. 
It’s the amount that the estimate of the target function will change given different training data.
A high-variance model is too complex and overfits the data, meaning it captures too much noise along with the underlying pattern and therefore performs poorly on unseen data.

The key is to find a good balance between bias and variance, known as the bias-variance tradeoff, to create a model that generalizes well to new, unseen data.

More on variance below:

If our model has high variance, it means that it’s highly sensitive to the specific houses in our training set.
So, for example, if we were to train our model on a slightly different set of houses in Austin, we might get very different predictions.
This is because a high-variance model tends to overfit to the training data—it captures not just the general trend, but also the random noise in the training data.

To illustrate this with an example, let’s say our training data includes a house that’s very expensive because it’s owned by a celebrity.
A high-variance model might learn from this example that all houses in that particular neighborhood are extremely expensive, even though the high price was really due to the celebrity owner, which is more of an exception rather than the rule.
If we then use this model to predict prices for houses in that neighborhood, it might predict higher prices than what they actually are.
